- [Instructor] Aspect oriented programming
is a super interesting topic,
and it gets a lot of attention
with respect to performance concerns.
Let's spend this lesson unpacking
what a spring practitioner needs to know
about AOP and performance.
AOP introduces modularity into systems
by means of the aspect.
In contrast, object oriented programming
creates modularity by means of the object.
AOP modularizes cross cutting concerns
like logging and security,
and this is where the two paradigms compliment one another.
Solid OO design will want a tight encapsulation
of your business logic.
Cross cutting concerns like logging and security
are super important to the functioning of the application,
but they also muddy up good OO design
since these concerns are secondary,
or at least have a very different nature
than the business concerns of your spring application,
so that's why we need it.
The spring framework makes it straightforward
to configure AOP behaviors using annotations,
and as a spring practitioner,
you're likely to be depending on the spring AOP
and or the AspectJ libraries.
An AOP aware system combines native code with aspect code
in order to produce a running application.
This combining is called weaving,
and it can be done in a number of ways.
It can be done at the time you compile your code,
it can be done after you compile your code
with a binary code, or it can be done at runtime.
The details of weaving are very interesting,
and they're also outside the scope of this lesson.
In this lesson, the question we're wondering is,
does all of this weaving introduce enough overhead
into my spring app that I need to worry about it?
The answer is no, not for most spring applications.
Many studies have been done in Academia
deeply diving into aspect oriented programming
and different ways of implementing it.
And the consensus is clear that in most cases,
AOP does not introduce enough runtime performance hit
to be a concern, especially in a spring context
where the vast majority of spring applications
are concerned with database connections.
APIs and services across the globe,
complex CIC deployment build and deployment pipelines,
all of those connectivity activities
dwarf any negative impact that there might be
with respect to AOP.
Okay, so why this lesson,
why do we need to care about it?
This is why,
because it's hard to predict the real-world behaviors
that our AOP configurations will cause.
And that's a result not of AOP itself,
but as a result of the ease with which we can integrate
aspects into our object oriented situation.
Also, it's a key part of your application architecture
and having a deep understanding of how AOP is impacting you
is a good professional thing to be concerned about.
The name of the game with AOP
and the way that you can answer the questions
you'll get from your stakeholders about it
are to be answered with good observability.
And we're going to learn about instrumentation
in this lesson,
and we're specifically going to learn to instrument
our aspect oriented code within our demo application
so that we can expose the impact that our AOP configurations
are having.
To instrument code,
what you're doing is you're injecting hooks
into an application at compile time or at runtime
in order to debug or profile specific behaviors
that you can configure.
Instrumentation requires a Java agent
to eavesdrop in a sense to your runtime
and extract the profile data that you've asked for.
In this application,
we're going to use a platform called Glowroot.
Glowroot's an open-source, easy to run locally
application performance monitor,
it represents a whole class of platforms.
And the things that we learned with respect to Glowroot
can transfer to any number of other performance monitor
platforms.
There are a couple of terms I would like to go over
before we jump into our hands-on code demonstration,
one of those terms is transaction.
Just remember that a transaction is a capture point boundary
for a request or operation.
And a trace is detailed information
about the operations within a transaction,
like timings, error call stacks and thread profiles.
Throughput is a measure of operation efficiency.
It's often expressed as request served per minute
or per second for a statistic like that.
All right, let's jump in to our code and learn some things.
In a previous lesson, we configured an aspect class
in order to deliver some custom performance monitoring.
And we're going to relook at that work that we did together
in order to instrument this aspect part of our application,
to get a deep understanding of the performance
of this part of our application.
Let me please walk you through the key points here
in our code base,
we have a monitor endpoint that we can hit in a browser,
and what that will invoke is an expensive calculation
on an object.
That expensive calculation
is joined by means of our aspect configuration class
to our custom monitoring method.
The custom monitoring method lives here
in our custom performance monitor class,
and it's specifically doing some calculations
and some logging.
It's actually not doing much calculation,
it's mostly doing logging.
So what we want to instrument here,
in other words, the things that we want to get visibility on
related to the subsystem of our application are three:
I would like to have a view of this expensive calculation.
I would like to know how much time
my application is spending on it.
I would like to know how my custom performance monitor
is behaving,
that would be represented by this method here.
And I would like to know how much time my application
is spending at runtime on this whole AOP setup
that I have configured.
So, I'm going to show you how to instrument this code
in order to get visibility
on those three really specific things.
Like I said, we're going to use Glowroot to do this.
In a previous lesson,
we hopped over this instrumentation ability,
but we're going to have a deep dive into it now.
And I have pre set up some instrumented classes here
that I'd like to walk you through.
First of all, this expensive calculation class.
How we configure this in the instrumentation panel
of Glowroot is by naming the class,
by naming the method that we want to look at,
we're configuring a trace entry,
in other words, I want some very detailed information
about this performance.
This trace entry matters,
and I'm going to talk about that in a minute.
We'll come back and visit what that trace entry
is all about.
This timer, we're calling it calculation.
In other words, we want to roll up into a single timer.
This timer will allow us to aggregate under a single label
all of the time that our application spends
in this particular method.
We're going to give it a stack trace threshold of very low
because I want to force traces to get thrown
so that we can look at them.
We will put this within a transaction that we call custom,
and we're going to give it a transaction name
of AOP_PerfMon.
Okay, let's go look at the other two.
We are going to also instrument this entire performance
monitor configuration class.
Remember, this is the aspect class
that configures our AOP behaviors.
Class name is AOP performance monitor configuration.
We're going to have a look at all of the methods
in that class.
We're going to ask for a trace,
detailed information on this method,
our trace entry will be a method name,
and we're going to give this particular timer the name AOP.
So all of the time that we spend in that configuration class
will be aggregated under a timer called AOP.
Give it a very low stack trace threshold of one,
we will also give it the same transaction type name
of custom and the same transaction name of AOP_PerfMon.
And then last but not least, similarly,
we have also instrumented our custom performance
monitor class,
we're looking at the specific invokedUnderTrace.
Much of this is the same.
We're giving this timer the label of advice.
This is advice within our system,
and we're going to roll up all of the time
we spend on our AOP advice under this timer name.
Customers are transaction type,
transaction name like the others is AOP_PerfMon.
And that's that.
That's an overview of the instrumentation that we've set up.
All right.
Let's go to our monitor endpoint,
load it it up a couple times,
and see what Glowroot will tell us.
Now, look here.
We have a new transaction type under our dropdown list
that we didn't have the first time we looked at Glowroot,
it's called custom.
And inside custom,
let's take this down to the last 60 minutes.
Inside custom transaction,
we have a transaction named AOP_PerfMon.
AOP_PerfMon is what we have labeled our custom
instrumentations.
And the first thing I'd like to draw your attention to
is this legend of timers.
Remember those timers I pointed out to you
on the instrumentation configuration page?
This is where we can see the results
of those instrumentations.
In this view, we can see four different timers
aggregated by color,
two of them are from our custom instrumentations.
The calculation timer
is the work that our application is doing,
and the advice is what we joined to our calculation
by means of AOP.
So it gives us a nice little chart here
with a breakdown of all of these activities.
I should add that logging was done automatically for us
by Glowroot.
And notice that there's another timer
that's not here at all, which is that AOP timer,
which tells us we've spent no time in that aspect class
at all during the execution of this transaction,
which is useful information to know.
So let's quickly look here at the breakdown,
we have numbers here on what we spent on
all of these different activities.
I'd like you to notice the calculation class,
which is our "native class" invoked some advice,
which then stepped back into calculation.
And we're going to have a look at some of the details
of that activity in a minute,
but the thing to draw away from here
is that the advice number that we're interested in
is extremely tiny.
We can see on the chart that the advice here
is only 0.2% of our total activity,
and then this breakdown just gives us more details
about what activities have been taking our time.
The final thing I want to have you look at is a trace.
These aren't truly slow traces,
we kind of manufacture these traces.
But let's have a look at these trace entries.
So remember I told you that the trace entry name mattered,
this is why.
What we can see here is the trace entry
for our execute method we used as the input parameter.
And then that trace entry is moving down here
into the custom performance monitor interceptor.
This is telling us that the expensive calculation
is being joined here with spring frameworks AOP library
to invoke our custom monitor,
which is then returning control in the thread
back to our expensive calculation thread,
and then coming in the result of our logging.
So here you can get a very detailed view
of exactly how your AOP library
is interacting with your native code
in order to get your end result.
The good news here is that our timings are excellent,
we're spending no time in the configuration part of our AOP
and a very tiny bit of time and the advice.
So this is a very real-world demonstration
of how to instrument any Java code, really,
but specifically, you can instrument your aspect oriented
code in your spring code base
in order to get deep visibility
into the aspect oriented behaviors of your system.